Add multilayer maps blog (#1421)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Getting started with multilayer maps in OpenSearch"
authors:
  - vijay
  - navneev
  - junqiu
  - satnandi
  - kolchfa
date:   2023-03-09
categories:
  - technical-post
meta_keywords: 

> meta_description: 

Reviewer: Please add the following meta: 

**meta_keywords**: multilayer maps, multiple map layers, OpenSearch Dashboards, geospatial data
**meta_description:** Explore the multilayer map functionality in OpenSearch and see how you can visualize geographical data from different data sources at different zoom levels.

> excerpt: OpenSearch 2.5 introduced new multilayer maps for visualizing geographical data and narrating your story. Displaying multiple layers on a map lets you show data from different sources at different zoom levels. Additionally, in OpenSearch 2.6, you can add multilayer maps to dashboard panels within OpenSearch Dashboards, which makes it easier to analyze your geospatial data in the context of other visualizations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
excerpt: OpenSearch 2.5 introduced new multilayer maps for visualizing geographical data. Displaying multiple layers on a map lets you show data from different sources at different zoom levels. Additionally, in OpenSearch 2.6, you can add multilayer maps to dashboard panels within OpenSearch Dashboards, which makes it easier to analyze your geospatial data in the context of other visualizations. 
```

---

> [OpenSearch 2.5](https://opensearch.org/docs/2.5/dashboards/maps-plugin/) introduced new multilayer maps for visualizing geographical data and narrating your story. Displaying multiple layers on a map lets you show data from different sources at different zoom levels. Let’s say you’re building a real estate application. Suppose you have an index with the number of houses available at the county level, another index with the number of houses available at the city level, and the third index with detailed information about individual houses. Initially, you may want to show the user a map with county boundaries and data. As the user zooms in, you’ll show city boundaries and data. As the user zooms in even more, you’ll display each house with information like the price, number of bedrooms, and so on. With the new multilayer maps, you can build various layers data from different data sources to accomplish this task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[OpenSearch 2.5](https://opensearch.org/docs/2.5/dashboards/maps-plugin/) introduced new multilayer maps for visualizing geographical data. Displaying multiple layers on a map lets you show data from different sources at different zoom levels. Let’s say you’re building a real estate application. Suppose you have one index with the number of houses available at the county level, another index with the number of houses available at the city level, and a third index with detailed information about individual houses. Initially, you may want to show the user a map with county boundaries and data. As the user zooms in, you’ll show city boundaries and data. As the user zooms in even more, you’ll display each house with information like the price, number of bedrooms, and so on. With the new multilayer maps, you can build various data layers from different data sources to accomplish this task.
```

Multilayer maps let you:

* Add multiple layers to visualize your data.
* View or analyze geographical data that comes from different data sources.
* View different data at different zoom levels.
* Visualize additional data with tooltips.

> * Continuously refresh data for a real-time dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Continuously refresh data, yielding a real-time dataset.
```

Author: Leaving as is because the meaning is not the same.

Additionally, in [OpenSearch 2.6](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/dashboards/visualize/maps/), you can add multilayer maps to dashboard panels within OpenSearch Dashboards, which makes it easier to analyze your geospatial data in the context of other visualizations. 

## Getting started

> To get started, try out the new maps in the [OpenSearch Playground](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home#/), which is currently on version 2.6 and includes all the latest features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get started, try out the new maps on the [OpenSearch Playground](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home#/), which is currently on version 2.6 and includes all the latest features.
```

To explore a prebuilt example map, perform the following steps:

1. On the top menu, go to **OpenSearch Plugins** > **Maps**.

> 2. Select  **[Flights] Flights Status on Maps Destination Location**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Select **[Flights] Flights Status on Maps Destination Location**.
```

> You’ll see the following example map that is based on the **Sample flight data** dataset:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You’ll see the following example map that is based on the **Sample flight data** dataset.
```

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/map-explanation.png" alt="Example map"/>{: .img-fluid }

Let’s get familiar with the map’s components:

* The **search** bar (1) lets you search or filter the data that is displayed.

> * The **time filter** (2) lets you customize the date range for displaying the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The **time filter** (2) lets you customize the date range for displayed data.
```

* The **Layers** panel (3) shows the layers configured for this map. The example map consists of a *basemap* called **Default map** (4) and three additional *document layers*: **Cancelled Flights**, **Delayed Flights**, and **Flights On Time** (5).

## All about that basemap

The *basemap* (**Default map** in the preceding image) serves as a canvas for the data. In this case, the basemap is the default map provided by OpenSearch (see the attribution in the lower-right corner of the map). The OpenSearch basemap is a vector tile map, and therefore offers faster loading times and smoother zooming than a raster tile map. It supports zoom levels 0--22.

> You can add more than one basemap or change the basemap to your own or a third-party map by adding a custom map layer.  To add a custom basemap, in the **Layers** panel select **Add layer** and then select **Custom map**. For detailed instructions about configuring a custom map, see [Adding a custom map](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/dashboards/visualize/maps/#adding-a-custom-map).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add more than one basemap or change the basemap to your own or a third-party map by adding a custom map layer. To add a custom basemap, in the **Layers** panel select **Add layer** and then select **Custom map**. For detailed instructions on configuring a custom map, see [Adding a custom map](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/dashboards/visualize/maps/#adding-a-custom-map).
```

For example, if you select the **Cancelled Flights** layer, you’ll see the layer’s configuration, as shown in the following image.

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/layer-settings.gif" alt="Explore layer configuration"/>{: .img-fluid }

From the settings panel, explore the following tabs:

1. The **Data** tab gives you an idea about the data settings for the layer, for example:

    * The layer is based on the `opensearch_dashboards_sample_data_flights` data source.
    * The number of documents in the layer is limited to 1000.
    * The layer displays the `DestLocation` field with the following filter applied:

    ```json
    {
    "query": {
        "match_phrase": {
        "Cancelled": true
        }
    }
    }
    ```

    To apply a different filter, select **Add filter** and then edit the filter in the UI or select **Edit as Query DSL**.

1. The **Style** tab lets you know how the layer is displayed on the map, for example:

>     * The data points for the layer are displayed in red color.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * The data points for the layer are displayed in red.
```

1. The **Settings** tab contains other settings, for example:

    * The layer is visible for zoom levels 4—22.
    * The layer’s opacity is 70%.

## It’s an illusion: The disappearing dots

> If you’re still following this post, you should have one question at this point: 

Reviewer 2: The deleted text could be misconstrued as potentially insulting.

> *Where are the red dots that signify cancelled flights?* 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

In fact, in the example map all the dots are green. Are no flights cancelled? The answer is: You have to look closer. 

The **Cancelled Flights** layer is visible only for zoom levels 4--22, so you’ll have to zoom in to see the cancelled flight data points, as shown in the following image. 

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/layers-zoomed-in.png" alt="All layers are visible when zooming in"/>{: .img-fluid }

> The second question that you might have is: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another question that you might have is, "Why are there only three document layers, but the dots on the map come in more than three colors?" 
```

> *Why are there only three document layers, but the dots on the map come in more than three colors?* 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

The answer to this question lies in the opacity and the order of the layers.

If you examine the colors for all three document layers by selecting each one in turn, you will map the layers to the following colors:

* **Cancelled Flights**: red
* **Delayed Flights**: orange
* **Flights On Time**: green

However, all layers are set to have  70% opacity so if one data point coincides with the other, you’ll see a nice blend of the preceding colors.

> Moreover, try reordering the layers by dragging them by the handlebar (two horizontal lines) next to the layer names. You will see the data points change colors, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, try reordering the layers by dragging them by the handlebar (two horizontal lines) next to the layer names. You will see the data points change color, as shown in the following image.
```

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/reordering-layers.gif" alt="Reordering layers"/>{: .img-fluid }

To view only the **Cancelled Flights** layer, in the **Layers** panel, hide the **Delayed Flights** and **Flights On Time** by selecting the crossed-out eye icon next to the layer name. Now you see only the red dots that correspond to the **Cancelled Flights** layer, as shown in the following image.

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/cancelled-flights-only.png" alt="Showing only the cancelled flights layer"/>{: .img-fluid }

## Tooltips are appreciated

> The red data points alone don’t convey much information about your dataset. In this case, a tooltip can be worth a thousand words. The **Cancelled Flights** layer has tooltips configured, so if you hover over a city, you will see the information for the first cancelled flight. For example, hovering over Washington, D.C., lets you see it had four cancelled flights. To view the information for all cancelled flights, select the tooltip again and use the arrows in the tooltip to paginate through the flights.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The red data points alone don’t convey much information about your dataset. In this case, a tooltip can be worth a thousand words. The **Cancelled Flights** layer has tooltips configured, so if you hover over a city, you will see the information for the first cancelled flight. For example, hovering over Washington, D.C., lets you see that it had four cancelled flights. To view the information for all cancelled flights, select the tooltip again and use the arrows in the tooltip to paginate through the flights.
```

To add, remove, or change fields that are shown in the tooltip, in the **Cancelled Flights** pane, select the **Data** tab. Then add or delete tooltip fields in **Tooltip fields**, as shown in the following image. 

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/tooltip-settings.png" alt="Setting up tooltips"/>{: .img-fluid }

> If you have more than one layer coinciding in one data point, the tooltip displays the information for all layers. If you add back the **Delayed Flights** and **Flights On Time** layers, hover over Washington, D.C. once more and select the tooltip, you’ll see that now the tooltip contains 13 flights. You can select the layer you’re interested in from the dropdown list in the tooltip. Each layer type may have different fields in the tooltip. For example, the **Flights On Time** layer is the only layer that displays the `FlightTimeMin` field. To see all layers, select **All layers**, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: Let's simplify the first phrase. It's currently a bit confusingly worded. "If more than one layer coincides with one data point"?

> If you have more than one layer coinciding in one data point, the tooltip displays the information for all layers. If you add back the **Delayed Flights** and **Flights On Time** layers, hover over Washington, D.C. once more and select the tooltip, you’ll see that now the tooltip contains 13 flights. You can select the layer you’re interested in from the dropdown list in the tooltip. Each layer type may have different fields in the tooltip. For example, the **Flights On Time** layer is the only layer that displays the `FlightTimeMin` field. To see all layers, select **All layers**, as shown in the following image.

Author: Reworded.

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/tooltips.gif" alt="Viewing tooltips from multiple layers"/>

## A dashing dashboard map

In OpenSearch Dashboards version 2.6, you not only can create a map, but also add it to a dashboard. The caveat? You have to start from a dashboard, either new or existing. 

To add the example map to a dashboard, perform the following steps, as shown in the following image.

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/add-to-dashboard.gif" alt="Adding a map to a dashboard"/>{: .img-fluid }

1. On the top menu, go to **OpenSearch Dashboards** > **Dashboard**.
2. Select  **[Flights] Global Flight Dashboard.**
3. In the upper-right corner, select **Edit**. 
4. From the top menu, select **Add**. 
5. In the **Types** dropdown list, select **Maps**. 
6. Select  **[Flights] Flights Status on Maps Destination Location.**

After closing the **Add panels** flyout, you’ll see the example map on the bottom of the dashboard, as shown in the following image.

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-03-09-multilayer-maps/map-in-dashboard.png" alt="A map added to a dashboard"/>{: .img-fluid }

## What’s next?

> After trying out the new maps in the OpenSearch Playground, make sure to [download OpenSearch 2.6](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html) locally to create maps from your dataset. For detailed information about the maps features, see [Using maps](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/dashboards/visualize/maps) in the OpenSearch documentation. In the next release of OpenSearch, we’re planning to add the ability to draw boundaries on a map and a new type of layer (*cluster layer*) that will help you aggregate data on geopoints and geoshapes. For a full list of features planned for the upcoming release, see the [OpenSearch Project Roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/opensearch-project/projects/1?card_filter_query=is%3Aopen+label%3Ageospatial).  If you have any feedback or suggestions, we’d love to hear from you on the [OpenSearch community forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/). To learn how you can contribute, see the [dashboards-maps repo](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-maps) and the [geospatial repo](https://github.com/opensearch-project/geospatial).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After trying out the new maps on the OpenSearch Playground, make sure to [download OpenSearch 2.6](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html) locally to create maps from your dataset. For detailed information about map features, see [Using maps](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/dashboards/visualize/maps) in the OpenSearch documentation. 

In the next OpenSearch version release, we’re planning to add the ability to draw boundaries on a map and a new type of layer (*cluster layer*) that will help you aggregate data on geopoints and geoshapes. For a full list of features planned for the upcoming release, see the [OpenSearch Project Roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/opensearch-project/projects/1?card_filter_query=is%3Aopen+label%3Ageospatial). If you have any feedback or suggestions, we’d love to hear from you on the [OpenSearch community forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/). To learn how you can contribute, see the [dashboards-maps repo](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-maps) and the [geospatial repo](https://github.com/opensearch-project/geospatial).
```
